From [Minutes for the 2017-07-26 meeting](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-gpu/2017Jul/0004.html).

> DJ: what are next steps?
> Should Corentin or someone define an API? Or move on with the assumption that we have an agreement of the overall shape of this part? 
> KR / MM: seems too early to define an API
> DM: agree, also tied in to memory barriers
> CW: maybe we can make a comprehensive list of things we want to talk about before looking at the shape of the API
> DJ: Could do this on the wiki/github
> MM: an issue per issue, then close them?
> DM: Github milestones?
> KR: spreadsheet?
> DJ: volunteers?
> MM: I can start!