Chair: Dean \
Scribe: ê∞Üê∞çê∞î: Mehmet Oguz Derin \
Location: Google Meet

Latest specification: [https://webgpu.dev/wgsl](https://webgpu.dev/wgsl) \
WGSL open issues: [WGSL Issues](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Awgsl) \
Issues marked for meeting: [For Meeting Issues](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22for+meeting%22+label%3Awgsl)




## TL;DR;



*   We will continue iterating on the FAQ. Myles is going to spend proposed wording for the question at the end which is focusing on SPIR-V tooling
*   Discussions around for, continuing and comma continuing. Folks are looking at examples and seeing how they decompose into various structures.
*   We‚Äôve decided to take a wait and see approach for the preprocessor. Dan will send a proposal for a #line operator in order to support preprocessors at a higher level.


## Tentative agenda



*   WGSL FAQ
*   Comma operator / Continuing Block
*   for() loop
*   preprocessor
*   Agenda for next meeting


## Attendance

WIP, the list of all the people invited to the meeting. **In bold the people that have been seen in the meeting:**



*   Apple
    *   **Dean Jackson**
    *   Fil Pizlo
    *   **Myles C. Maxfield**
    *   **Robin Morisset**
*   Google
    *   **Dan Sinclair**
    *   **David Neto**
    *   **Kai Ninomiya**
    *   Ryan Harrison
*   Intel
    *   Yunchao He
    *   Narifumi Iwamoto
*   Microsoft
    *   **Damyan Pepper**
    *   **Greg Roth**
    *   **Rafael Cintron**
    *   **Michael Dougherty**
*   Mozilla
    *   **Dzmitry Malyshau**
    *   **Jeff Gilbert**
*   Joshua Groves
*   **Mehmet Oguz Derin**
*   **Timo de Kort**
*   Lukasz Pasek
*   Tyler Larson
*   **Pelle Johnsen**


# Cheat Sheet

**Prior Cheat Sheet**

_Summarizes updates from 2020 03 04 to 2020 03 10 (**only** updates)_

_This cheat sheet was built by the scribe who would extremely appreciate and build on feedback, contact using mehmetoguzderin@mehmetoguzderin.com_


<table>
  <tr>
   <td><strong>Issues</strong>
   </td>
   <td><strong>Pull Requests</strong>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><strong>#578 Validate Grammar on CI</strong>
<ol>

<li>Alternatives 
<ol>
 
<li>Grammophone
 
<li>Grammarkdown  
<ol>
  
<li>Similar to current
</li>  
</ol>
</li>  
</ol>

<li>Steps 
<ol>
 
<li>Agree on format
 
<li>Build extractor
 
<li>Hook to CI
</li> 
</ol>
</li> 
</ol>
   </td>
   <td><strong>#584 Update goals</strong>
<ol>

<li>Clarification about mention of `OpKill` requested
</li>
</ol>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><strong>#577 Remove `unless` statement`</strong>
<ol>

<li>Removal can complex++ round trip 
<ol>
 
<li>Two opinions  
<ol>
  
<li>Already complex++   
<ol>
   
<li>OpPhi
   
<li>OpCompositeInsert
</li>   
</ol>
  
<li>Don‚Äôt be so quick   
<ol>
   
<li>OpCompositeInsert is not settled
</li>   
</ol>
</li>   
</ol>
</li>   
</ol>
</li>   
</ol>
   </td>
   <td><strong>#562 Add FAQ for direction</strong>
<ol>

<li>Opinions 
<ol>
 
<li>Why textual is already implicit in the existence of the development of this language
</li> 
</ol>
</li> 
</ol>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><strong>#582 Define what bijective to SPIR-V is</strong>
<ol>

<li>Opinions 
<ol>
 
<li>Bijectivity is the wrong term
 
<li>Bijective to some quotient set
 
<li>1:1 (not bijective) to subset
 
<li>WGSL is both a compilation target and human-comprehensible language
 
<li>WGSL targets MSL and HLSL as critical paths
</li> 
</ol>
</li> 
</ol>
   </td>
   <td><strong>#599 Update goals</strong>
<ol>

<li>Injective to SPIR-V 
<ol>
 
<li>Not surjective
</li> 
</ol>

<li>Clearly addresses many points discussed in #582 and #586
</li>
</ol>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><strong>#593 Why Rusty syntax</strong>
<ol>

<li>Tooling can be built for WGSL instead of parasitizing a language‚Äôs tools

<li>Opinions 
<ol>
 
<li>Having fewest tokens isn‚Äôt a priority
 
<li>The `->` has a history for the preference towards it
 
<li>f32v3 and f32m3x3 instead mat3x3&lt;f32>
</li> 
</ol>
</li> 
</ol>
   </td>
   <td>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><strong>#568 Consider a preprocessor</strong>
<ol>

<li>Opinions 
<ol>
 
<li>This is sugar we don‚Äôt need
</li> 
</ol>
</li> 
</ol>
   </td>
   <td>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><strong>#569 Add common loop constructs</strong>
<ol>

<li>Opinions 
<ol>
 
<li>We don‚Äôt need the sugar  
<ol>
  
<li>Similar in Turing language
</li>  
</ol>
 
<li>Turing lang lacks continuing
</li> 
</ol>
</li> 
</ol>
   </td>
   <td>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><strong>#579 Continuing block</strong>
<ol>

<li>Opinions 
<ol>
 
<li>SPIR-V lacks continue break
 
<li>Continuing is too general to match  
<ol>
  
<li>We need to talk about complexities brought by inlining to continuing
</li>  
</ol>
 
<li>Continuing isn‚Äôt too general to match
 
<li>Interesting GLSL to SPIRV to WGSL~ transcription document
 
<li>Akin to programming with goto-heavy style
 
<li>Use spirv-cfg
</li> 
</ol>
</li> 
</ol>
   </td>
   <td>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><strong>#592 Entry point global variables</strong>
<ol>

<li>Opinions 
<ol>
 
<li>SPIR-V requires globals used to be listed with OpEntry
 
<li>(?) 1.4 made what‚Äôs present more clear, we should not overlook this and calculate or take list
 
<li>People coming from SPIR-V already have that list
 
<li>Should calculate
</li> 
</ol>
</li> 
</ol>
   </td>
   <td>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><strong>#561 Offset decorations on structures</strong>
<ol>

<li>Opinions 
<ol>
 
<li>Add defined layouts to ease development experience as it can let compiler provide more feedback
</li> 
</ol>
</li> 
</ol>
   </td>
   <td>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><strong>#581 Comma operator</strong>
<ol>

<li>Opinions 
<ol>
 
<li>It can lead to things like destructuring
 
<li>It can exist in more isolated contexts
 
<li>Comma beyond MVP
 
<li>Data shows comma is common in fors and fors are also common
 
<li>Let‚Äôs keep this discussion strictly about comma operator
</li> 
</ol>
</li> 
</ol>
   </td>
   <td>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><strong>#600 Plan for extension</strong>
<ol>

<li>Need to prevent keyword conflict

<li>Ground for new data types

<li>Version header maybe?
</li>
</ol>
   </td>
   <td>
   </td>
  </tr>
</table>



# WGSL FAQ



*   [https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/pull/576](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/pull/576)
*   [https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/pull/562](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/pull/562)
*   DN: I wrote the FAQ to address to posed questions. Don‚Äôt want to overload the section. Already point to draft which contains answers. I think where we got stuck is its forkage. It satisfies Twitter needs.
*   MM: The reason I weakened it is this group needs to be more impartial than the proposed pull request.. We need sections for HLSL and others if this is facing community. These languages are common to write in and they might come or go to those languages. But shops can even have their own languages. Instead of blessing one, we should be more comprehensive. Community group needs to be impartial.
*   DN: The question is what about my existing tooling? That‚Äôs why it is addressing an existing community and not forward looking community. That‚Äôs where things go with the forkage. Please feel free to add but not remove. The reason for its blessing-giving look is the lack.
*   PJ: We have to live with this development, it would be great to take input from ecosystem. Keep an open mind!
*   JF: We can write for any language even for those have non-matching semantics but we went for a route that gives less or more weight to SPIR-V. We can‚Äôt listen to all.
*   MM: I don‚Äôt think it is fair to say that. Saying SPIR-V is the maindriver is too much. We agreed to give elevation to SPIR-V but not an extreme weight.
*   PJ: Existing tooling has a huge part in HLSL, we should definitely address HLSL and kinds.
*   JF: We should not take a bottom-up approach but rather refine understanding as questions come.
*   DN: This FAQ is built to have a group‚Äôs voice way to address to the public.
*   DJ: Would modifying the questions and not just the answer be helpful?
*   DJ: Could Myles take another pass at his PR or comment on DN‚Äôs and discuss it next week unless there is a rush?
*   RM: I think we disagree on the target community, question is more whose questions are we serving.
*   DJ: We have many profiles of questioners, hopefully we get properly formed questions.
*   RM: Add edit access to the minutes, we should reverse the order of discussion for comma and for because it is more of a prior.
*   DS: These discussions have many shared points.


# for() loop #569 / Comma operator #581 / Continuing #579



*   [https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/569](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/569)
*   [https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/581](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/581)
*   [https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/579](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/579)
*   DN: This definitely needs some clarification. Simple cases are not expressive of the problem space. We have Turing language with similar choice of loop constructs (have mentioned in issue).
*   MM: Can you please address why it is better than other constructs?
*   DN: Because it captures all.
*   MM: I think we have proposals that do that.
*   DN: Some of them are even more confusing. If we will be truly welcoming to new programmers, we should be going for reducing cognitive load which is achieved by continuing.
*   PJ: Input from developer, if this is compilation target only then its fine, easier mapping is good. But if human editability is given priority, then we should have familiar things.
*   RM: We already have while loop. Having these constructs makes this language more readable for programmers. Adding these constructs is not a huge effort, we can have both and benefits of both.
*   DN: It is not as simple as it sounds, ANGLE is still fixing bugs.
*   MM: If we don‚Äôt add these constructs, then the work will be on programmer rather than us.
*   DS: I think simple for loop is good to have but something more complex is problematic.
*   JG: We should look at existing work and build on experience.
*   PJ: Seems like the dilemma of compilation target and editability is creating some stress.
*   DP: Those using as compilation target won‚Äôt use sugars.
*   DN: Multi level break requires special tracking, SPIR-V tried to avoid this.
*   JG: So multi level would be too powerful to trivially convert to SPIR-V?
*   DN: Philosophically, I am fine with it.
*   JG: So multi break is just a way we can‚Äôt go? Single level is fine.
*   DN: Let‚Äôs work on an example.
*   MM: It can be represented as a forward jump (?).
*   DN: Forward jumps are constrained in SPIR-V (?).
*   MM: Working on scopes can make things clear.
*   JG: It‚Äôs similar to having the continue block outside the loop, where the block can access into the loop‚Äôs variables.
*   DN: Yes, this is a little strange. People assume ‚Äúexist until the matching closing brace‚Äù.  We definitely need to work on examples and build on concrete artifacts.
*   JG: We have to look.
*   DJ: Maybe we should skip comma operator discussion for now. Is there still a discussion of a for loop that would exclude a comma?
*   JG: I would ask people to express without using comma.
*   RM: It would be simple to desugar comma, I don‚Äôt see how parsing of comma‚Äôd for could be messed up.
*   JG: Problem comes where you don‚Äôt see
*   KN: We have a bad bug in ANGLE while translating while to for. Too untrivial to fix.
*   DJ: Good to keep in mind that Shadertoy people have usage of for.
*   MM: I understand that as a compiler writer, lacking for loop might be desirable. But for a human facing language, lacking for is a failure. In Webkit, most loops are not infinite loops with breaks.
*   MM: We need to define writable.
*   DN: You can still have infinite loops with for.
*   MM: Infinite loops are not common.
*   PJ: Having less compiler bugs might be good.


# Preprocessor #568



*   [https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/568](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/568)
*   JG: Do we want a preprocessor? This could be a good point to take JS ecosystem into consideration.
*   RM: We don‚Äôt need to urgently add something specific to the language thanks to the possibility of using JS as a kind-of preprocessor. But I want to keep the possibility of adding some more limited thing to the language if we find every user to use the same pattern.
*   MD: We had a way of using spec. constants, we opted for directives.
*   MM:
*   MD: Compiler doesn‚Äôt take root signature into consideration.
*   JG: Aren‚Äôt these questions rather post-MVP?
*   DP: I think we need at least the ability for someone to write a preprocessor, adding #line directives for compiler errors.
*   PJ: When your shaders start to get complex, you definitely need a preprocessor and JS preprocessing could be extra work. Extra compilation step can produce unexpected problems, which is a bad burden.
*   MM: If we go wait for different implementations, we can see different paths.
*   DJ: Anyone not OK with wait and see?
*   DP: If you want to report errors, you should be able to point to a file & line.
*   MM: We can allow hash directives or have special comment type or have auxiliary files to facilitate line pointing.
*   DS: First two  end up being the same in WGSL because comment is #
*   DN: I would prefer one of the first two.
*   DJ: Anyone not OK with wait and see and (commented) close for now?


# Next week

#600

#561

#578