# WGSL 2021-09-07 Minutes

**ü™ë Chair:** Jeff Gilbert

**‚å®Ô∏è Scribe:** 

**üó∫ Location:** [meet.google.com](http://meet.google.com)

**üåê Timezone:** America/Los_Angeles

**‚åö Time:** Tuesday **<span style="text-decoration:underline;">***5pm-6pm***</span>**

**Specification:** [https://webgpu.dev/wgsl](https://webgpu.dev/wgsl)

**Meeting Issues:** [Marked Issues](https://github.com/orgs/gpuweb/projects/2#column-8898490)

**Open Issues:** [WGSL Issues](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Awgsl)

Note: These are the minutes taken in real-time. The official minutes can be found on [the WebGPU wiki](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/wiki).

If you didn't receive a [meet.google.com](meet.google.com) invitation and plan on participating, please send dneto a Google Apps enabled address and he'll add you.


---


# üìã Attendance

WIP, the list of all the people invited to the meeting. **In bold, the people that have been seen in the meeting:**



* Apple
    * **Myles C. Maxfield**
    * **Robin Morisset**
* Google
    * Alan Baker
    * Antonio Maiorano
    * Ben Clayton
    * Brandon Jones
    * Corentin Wallez
    * **David Neto**
    * Ekaterina Ignasheva
    * Kai Ninomiya
    * James Darpinian
    * **James Price**
    * Rahul Garg
    * Ryan Harrison
    * Sarah Mashayekhi
* Intel
    * Narifumi Iwamoto
    * Yunchao He
* Microsoft
    * Damyan Pepper
    * **Greg Roth**
    * Michael Dougherty
    * Rafael Cintron
    * Tex Riddell
* Mozilla
    * **Dzmitry Malyshau**
    * **Jeff Gilbert**
    * Jim Blandy
* Kings Distributed Systems
    * Daniel Desjardins
    * Hamada Gasmallah
    * Wes Garland
* Dominic Cerisano
* Eduardo H.P. Souza
* Joshua Groves
* Kris & Paul Leathers
* Lukasz Pasek
* Matijs Toonen
* **Mehmet Oguz Derin**
* Pelle Johnsen
* Timo de Kort
* Tyler Larson


---


# üì¢ Announcements


### Office Hour



* **Wednesday 10am-10:50am**
* **[https://meet.google.com/xrp-hpck-vmy](https://meet.google.com/xrp-hpck-vmy)**
* Everyone welcome
* Mass calendar invite will have been sent out
    * If you still need an invite, add your email here:
        * [jgilbert@mozilla.com](mailto:jgilbert@mozilla.com)


### On Todos



* (JG: I will make a spreadsheet for thumbs-up/down/maybe for each todo)
* 


---


# ‚è≥ Timeboxes


### [Fill out "Textual structure", eliminating several TODOs #2087](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/pull/2087)



* DN: I made a defined term called ‚Äúblank space‚Äù, not versed in unicode, so I‚Äôm not sure it that‚Äôs the entire set of things we want. We also talked about how `>>` and `]]` can maybe require backtracking, but I filed another issue for those. [#2092](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/2092) I also didn‚Äôt describe nested comments, in order to keep this simple.
* MM: Sounds good to us.
* **JG: Let‚Äôs take it.**
* 


### [precise_math attribute on functions #2080](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/pull/2080)



* DN: Further discussion today: Concerns that it‚Äôs not testable. Also concerned that it‚Äôs not stable, no way to make sure that (because untestable) it will keep working. One possibility is to make it an extension with actual strict requirements, but without signing us up for these sometimes-impossible strict requirements in core.
* MM: In version of spir-v that wgsl is targeting, there‚Äôs no way to guarantee/require ieee floats?
* DN: OpenCL can, but not spir-v in general.
* DM: Spir-v doesn‚Äôt support some things, but not everything we need?
* DN: NoContraction is visible, feature in vulkan-spirv. Not sure how strict the vulkan conformance tests are good enough to guarantee what we need. I would need more time to test whether it‚Äôs feasible on vulkan.
* MM: When this extension is enabled, we can test that the math would be right. Problem is when we don‚Äôt have the extension, where we can‚Äôt really guarantee anything.
* DN: When this was ‚ÄúSHOULD‚Äù, it‚Äôs easy to try for. Making an extension would require more work to see if we can support ‚ÄúMUST‚Äù.
* GR: Why was it said that this would have no effect on DX12?
* DN: I think the original poster did minor testing and didn‚Äôs have issues, so didn‚Äôt look into this?
* GR: We do have `precise` which should work, but yeah, not sure how to test non-precise.
* DM: `precise` is applied to variables? (yes)
* MM: Another question, is can global variables be precise? This leads me to a recommendation that it be per-module, and also that this all Metal can handle.
* DN: Could (galaxy-brain idea) compile multiple times with and without precise as needed, since we control when entrypoints are used?
* MM: Compiling multiple times would be bad, because compiling is already slow.
* DM: I think we sort of already handle this (function granularity) in Metal backends.
* MM: Why per-function, when no native API does that. Metal is per-module, others are per-variable.
* DN: There‚Äôs some concerns about how deep (into function calls?) to propagate `precise` when on variables, at least in a way that‚Äôs not super verbose.
* (timebox hit, tabled to next meeting)


### [Rewrite select() for scalar condition and add missing algorithm tags #2084 ](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/pull/2084)



* (DN: ‚ÄúI need some more time for review.‚Äù  Particularly the editorial aspect:  how should builtin functions be described: using type assertions vs. function prototypes (which are not a defined concept.)
* DN: I see a non-editorial aspect here, and so the group should discuss that. However, I wanted to just split out and land the (easy) editorial part first.
* MM: We‚Äôre ready to discuss the substantive proposal here. We think it should be fine. If it‚Äôs not natively supported, can broadcast.
* DM: I‚Äôm worried about adding implicit broadcasts.
* MM: I think it‚Äôs a natural addition here but I won‚Äôt fight for it.
* DM: I would like to see an investigation of existing languages, if they offer it, and therefore if people use it.
* DN: I can probably do that investigation as part of the review.
* **Result: DN to split out, do review, maybe investigation mini-report**


### [wgsl: support arrayLength on pointer to sized array #2081 ](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/pull/2081)



* DN: Ben followed up here, original poster wasn‚Äôt aware of the ability to resize arrays based on global lets (not implemented in Tint?), and their usecase didn‚Äôt need it(?), so our purpose here is more tenuous.
* DN: Also, some of us don‚Äôt like the pointer form, but also, some of us don‚Äôt like the non-pointer form. Particularly having to maybe (officially) do the evaluation of the expression in order to determine the size.
* DN: As such, we‚Äôre not sure we need this, so we‚Äôd like to push this post-MVP.
* MM: A little sad about this. We‚Äôd like to see this eventually, and we‚Äôre ready to talk about this in more depth now, but we‚Äôre ok with pushing it back.
* DM: Why did people not like the pointer form?
* DN: I‚Äôm trying to represent another person‚Äôs stance, but people don‚Äôt like the extra character/typing to do this.
* MM: Ideally we‚Äôd like to see this for all array types. For now, because of the shape of things, it‚Äôs easier to not allow it on `let` arrays for now, even if we want to go further eventually.
* JG: I‚Äôm having trouble entirely following here, so examples of good-for-me-thing vs bad-for-me-thing, that‚Äôd be easier to follow for me.
* DN: I‚Äôm trying to capture the warning here about disadvantages to the pointer approach, but not to block it. We will definitely have to keep explaining this, but maybe that‚Äôs fine.
* MM: I‚Äôll echo that. Also the language is worse off if theres *no* way to do this. *A* way to do this would be an improvement here.
* DN: Ok, ok to land the pointer form? (yes)
* **Result: Land pointer form, MM to open issues for the other forms.**
* DM: I hope we don‚Äôt need more forms, ideally.
* MM: It‚Äôs a good point that we should consider all this in respect to the rest of the language.


### [Error with literal indexing in a shader #1803 ](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/1803)  



* DN: AB strongly wants us to have consistent behavior for OOB access here, so more discussion is needed here.
* DM: The method for OOB protection is in fact different for different types here, so I‚Äôm not sure we *need* them to all be the same.
* RM: While I think consistency is important for portability, I think it‚Äôs fine to have this be compile-time.
* MM: Whenever we expand constexpr, if we do this analysis, this should apply to all indexing, not just literals.
* DM: Right, it‚Äôs not that it‚Äôs an option *not to* for e.g. let-arrays and OpCompositeExtract
* MM: I think the job for the compiler is the same.
* MM: DM, can you restate the OOB behavior point?
* DM: On uniform and storage memory backed arrays are relying on robust-buffer-access, but everything else uses manual code injections for guarding against OOB access. Point AB was making was that we should have consistent behavior between these different types. I‚Äôm saying that we‚Äôre already doing something different, so why pretend we‚Äôre not. 
* MM: So the consistency argument isn‚Äôt particularly strong for you here.
* DM: Two types of consistency here, so it‚Äôs not clear-cut.
* DN: Today, spec gives you an Invalid Reference if you reach outside your array. If this is still inside the robust-buffer-access, the hardware feature will not necessarily kick in to save you. I haven‚Äôt thought it all the way through, but I worry about us being incomplete here.
* MM: Ok, so you have a buffer of ten-element arrays. I think it‚Äôd be bad if it had to do access checks against both the ten-element array, and also against the full buffer/outside array. If we only have one for performance reasons, we only want the latter.
* DM: I think that‚Äôs actually what we have now.
* DM: I think we might have spec‚Äôd something even less restrictive, maybe for local variables? We should double-check that we haven‚Äôt written divergent things.
* MM: Can we tentatively resolve and ask for reversion if need be?
* DN: Would prefer to get input first, preferably in written async form.


---


# ‚öñÔ∏è Discussions


### [Match let declarations for inferred types #2053 ](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/pull/2053)



* Earlier, the group agreed not to do that.
* DN: accidentally added an example showing it works; but grammar still prohibits it.
* DM: [https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/pull/1944](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/pull/1944) fix the example, and clarify the prose
* MOD: [#2053](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/pull/2053) updates grammar to allow it
* Tint supports it, and has some Google-internal users have used it.
* DN: Story is, we said we didn‚Äôt want inference for global scope, but then I wrote a bad example, that wasn‚Äôt actually valid, so here we are.
* MM: Why didn‚Äôt we want this?
* DN: I think we had some voices that were concerned, e.g. about the amount of work. But we did the work anyways
* DM: Yeah I think it‚Äôs not too much work. Any reason not to just take it here?
* JG: I think it would be good to revive the reasons that we‚Äôre not deciding in spite of.
* DM: I think it was mostly the perceived amount of work, which we‚Äôre now not worried about.
* **Result: Let‚Äôs take it, and revert later if we‚Äôre wrong.**


---


# üìÜ Next Meeting Agenda



* Next meeting: 2021-09-14 (non-APAC 11am time)
* [[wgsl] Support compile-time-constants (constexpr) ¬∑ Issue #1272](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/1272) 