Chair: Dean \
Scribe: ê∞Üê∞çê∞î: Mehmet Oguz Derin \
Location: Google Meet





## Tentative agenda



*   Introductions
*   Meeting Time
*   Editors
*   Design Principles (design and bijectivity)
*   Comma operator / Continuing construct
*   for() loop
*   preprocessor
*   [Other open issues](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Awgsl)
*   Agenda for next meeting


# TL;DR;



*   Meetings will be in the same time slot, Tuesdays at 2pm EDT.
*   Editors:
    *   Dan Sinclair (Google)
    *   Myles Maxfield (Apple)
    *   Possible 3rd (Microsoft)
*   Design Principles
    *   Entries from #586 are accepted; PR has been sent to update the README and Goals section.
*   Bijectivity
    *   Discussion around what bijectivity means
    *   Need to be able to adapt to conversion to multiple shading languages.
    *   Want to try to preserve performance characteristics but there are trade offs
    *   Myles to send a PR to update the README with bijectivity notes
*   Agenda
    *   Tag items in the bug tracker if you wish them to be discussed at the next meeting.


## Attendance


    WIP, the list of all the people invited to the meeting. **In bold the people that have been seen in the meeting:**



*   Apple
    *   **Dean Jackson**
    *   Fil Pizlo
    *   **Myles C. Maxfield**
    *   **Robin Morisset**
*   Google
    *   **Dan Sinclair**
    *   **David Neto**
    *   Kai Ninomiya
    *   **Ryan Harrison**
    *   **Sarah Mashayekhi**
*   Intel
    *   **Yunchao He**
    *   **Narifumi Iwamoto**
*   Microsoft
    *   **Damyan Pepper**
    *   **Rafael Cintron**
    *   **Michael Dougherty**
*   Mozilla
    *   **Dzmitry Malyshau**
    *   **Jeff Gilbert**
*   Joshua Groves
*   **Mehmet Oguz Derin**
*   **Timo de Kort**
*   Lukasz Pasek
*   Tyler Larson

Latest specification: [https://gpuweb.github.io/gpuweb/wgsl.html](https://gpuweb.github.io/gpuweb/wgsl.html)


# Introductions (especially new people)



*   DJ: I thought it would be nice to start with introductions.
*   DS: Wrote current spec of WGSL, wrote Tint impl
*   SM: Worked on Tint impl worked on type check
*   DN: Helped DS validate WGSL stuff
*   RH: Help bring stuff together
*   RM: Apple for the JS core team. I was working on WSL when that was the proposal.
*   MM: Worked on WHLSL (WSL)
*   DJ: (Not) Boss of Myles, temporary chair of WGSL group
*   YH: Working on API, observer
*   NI: From Intel
*   RC: Work on WGPU WGSL on behalf of Microsoft
*   DP: Also work on impl on Microsoft
*   MD: HLSL dev lead
*   DM: Work on Mozilla‚Äôs implementation, build shader stack for Mozilla‚Äôs engine
*   JG: Also on Mozilla. Here to contribute.
*   MOD: 
*   TdK: Enthusiast. Working with WGPU in Rust. Developer.
*   DN: We‚Äôve had some interactions on Twitter with people who want to provide input.
*   We need a forum for when we tell people on twitter etc to ‚Äútake it back to the committee‚Äù, so we‚Äôll need a valid way to do that.

# 
    Administration

*   DJ: Let‚Äôs try using github labels to mark things for the meeting agenda. To nominate an issue or PR for the meeting, add the ‚ÄúFor Meeting‚Äù label.
*   DJ: Deciding on timing is crucial.


# Meeting Time



*   Doodle/Web App for picking a time:  [https://doodle.com/poll/24z9q49ednkgbqf5](https://doodle.com/poll/24z9q49ednkgbqf5)
*   MM: Would like more input on the Doodle.
*   DJ: It displays in your local time by default.
*   DJ: This time looks good.
*   MM: A concern that I have is if this timing is bad for YH then we won‚Äôt have any input from Intel
*   YH: Maybe one hour earlier?
*   DJ: I propose we stick with this time for a while unless...

Resolved: Meetings will be 11am PST each Tuesday.


# Editors



*   DJ: I think we should limit it to 2 or 3 editors to make it easier to manage
*   DS: I have nominated myself as an editor.
*   MM: I‚Äôd like to nominate myself
*   MD: I know an individual that might be interested unfortunately not on the call. Many experience at NVIDIA, I‚Äôll shoot an email. Ray Williams.
*   DJ: Let‚Äôs give it some time, for now let‚Äôs say DS and MM are editors.
*   MM: Any reason for absence?
*   MD: Just this week, he‚Äôs on vacation.

Resolved: Dan and Myles to be editors. Microsoft may nominate a third editor during the coming week.


# Design Principles



*   DJ: OK to start with Design principles?
*   DJ: Let‚Äôs start with 586
*   [https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/586](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/586)
    *   DS: I listed a bunch of topics
        *   text based language
        *   writable by programmers
        *   cost free bijection [#582](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/582) between WebGPU SPIR-V and WGSL and back
        *   The bijection is simple and efficient, doesn't require an optimizing WGSL compiler
        *   Directly represents structured control flow
        *   Language is as small as possible to represent what we need
        *   The burden is always to show why we must add something
    *   DS: DN noted that it should be strongly statically typed
    *   DS: And other comments
    *   MM: Having an isolated focus on SPIR-V is not a good perspective, we have MSL etc. to consider too
    *   DN: [missed]
    *   DJ: Treatment of the language is a point of heated discussion
    *   MM: Extreme A is no interaction with SPIRV?, extreme B is very tightly coupled to SPIRV, we should find a middle point
    *   DN: I think human readability is achieved already by the initial proposal despite its subjective nature. I think we are well beyond talking extremes and down to a more narrow field of discussion.
    *   DJ: We agree with DS‚Äôs list
    *   MM: Burden-proof is the responsibility of group, not something that is needed in the language specification.
    *   MM: I added simple compilation to MSL and HLSL because omission is simply incorrect
    *   DN: We just have different wording, I am fine with mentioning MSL and HLSL explicitly
    *   MM: I believe there is some subtle conflict, there needs to be a more explanation
    *   DP: We need to take all into consideration, that‚Äôs the balance
    *   JF: That‚Äôs implicit
    *   MM: E.g. continuing block. That‚Äôs a relatively more trivial construct in SPIR-V compared to MSL and HLSL. I want it to be a balanced effort across all.
    *   JG: I also want it more balanced
    *   DS: Me too
    *   DN: Agreed
    *   DM: Targeting all languages is important but we give weight to SPIR-V because of semantic similarity
    *   DP: SPIR-V has a special place here
    *   DM: So do we mean all three need to be efficiently generated?
    *   RM: I think we need all three simple/efficient to generate, just with an extra constraint of using SPIRV for semantics, and possibly requiring something about SPIRV->WGSL->SPIRV.
    *   MM: How do we judge how easy it was to generate?

Resolved: Dan‚Äôs initial list of principles from #586 will be accepted. Some of them in the language, some in the README. Dan will send a pull request for this.

Resolved: Incorporate ‚ÄúSupporting simple and efficient compilation to MSL and HLSL‚Äù item.



*   [https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/582](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/582) (bijectivity)
    *   DN: Just 10 min before meeting I added comment on bijectivity issue, can give a briefing. Comment is  [https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/582#issuecomment-594108572](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/582#issuecomment-594108572)
    *   MM: Cool! I have a bunch of responses. Thank you!
    *   MM: First one is we have other target languages. When an author writes a program, exact register pressure won‚Äôt be applicable. We should be able to adapt to this.
    *   MM: Authors might take a specific tradeoff but we target all the devices on the web. I don‚Äôt propose that author shouldn‚Äôt have degrees of freedom on optimization but‚Ä¶
    *   MM: We should rather be data driven and build around it.
    *   MM: I think byte-to-byte conversion is infeasible and the group also probably agrees.
    *   NI: Is integrated GPU in consideration? The bigger GPUs and internal modules diverge on many specifications. What level of abstraction are we looking at?
    *   DN: We take all targets into consideration. We can allow developers do runtime probing and maybe branch according to that. Optimization occurs in existence of uncertainty. Dealing with fuzziness is a fact of life and we should give the tools to developers to determine in runtime.
    *   MM: I think we are agreeing more rather than disagreeing. We can build data with devices and take decisions using it to reduce the search space.
    *   JG: We should also take expertise into consideration. We have access to a lot of experts.
    *   MM: No denying to that.
    *   DN: We should be reductionist for level of sophistication of driver. I think there‚Äôs a world we can optimize less for the backends.
    *   DP: That‚Äôs optimistic.
    *   MD: Driver authors will definitely optimize.
    *   DN: I want to make optimization as easy as possible.
    *   NI: [missed]. I was wondering if we were thinking of adding another level above this.
    *   MM: I‚Äôll make the point that Web Assembly started with this goal, but ended up with each implementation having a multi-level optimizing compiler for Wasm.
    *   RM: We should try to preserve as much of possible as performance and semantics from WGSL and SPIRV.
    *   DN: I liked Maciej‚Äôs point about trading complexity in places.
    *   DN: ‚ÄúUnless‚Äù operator prevents an extra pass in resolving flow. But going forward, we can implement and then make engineering decisions.

Resolved: Myles to send a pull request for the bijectivity rules in the README.


# Wrap up



*   DJ: We don‚Äôt have much time left but we had a good first meeting. If you want an issue discussed, please label it to be discussed at meeting.
*   
*   


## Agenda for next meeting

Comma operator #581



*   [https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/581](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/581)
*   [https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/579](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/579)
*   

for() loop #569



*   [https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/569](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/569)
*   

Preprocessor #568



*   [https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/568](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/568)

Scribes script. ‚ñ†