# WGSL 2023-06-06 Minutes

**ğŸª‘ Chair:** KG

**âŒ¨ï¸ğŸ™ Scribes:** 

**ğŸ—º Location:** [meet.google.com](http://meet.google.com)

**âŒš Time:** Tuesday **4-5pm **Americas/Los_Angeles (**Pacific-timed**)

**Specification:** [https://webgpu.dev/wgsl](https://webgpu.dev/wgsl)

**Meeting Issues:** [Marked Issues](https://github.com/orgs/gpuweb/projects/2#column-8898490)

**Open Issues:** [WGSL Issues](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Awgsl), [Outstanding V1 Issues+PRs](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues?q=is%3Aopen+label%3Awgsl+-label%3A%22wgsl+resolved%22+-label%3Aeditorial+milestone%3AV1.0), [Untriaged WGSL issues](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues?q=is%3Aopen+label%3Awgsl+-label%3A%22wgsl+resolved%22+-label%3Aeditorial+no%3Amilestone)

**Todos doc: **[WGSL TODOs](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1OnsotW_eWoWn4m9lW2-nRrOfR8gBSJ5Oqz9O-9hTDdA/edit#gid=0)

**Previous:** [2023-05-30 WGSL - Agenda / Minutes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1HDGzKVB8BsXf3MIuEZvokBRKCzY4islkOV31Il24re0) 

 

Note: These are the minutes taken in real-time. The official minutes can be found on [the WebGPU wiki](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/wiki).

If you didn't receive a [meet.google.com](meet.google.com) invitation and plan on participating, please send dneto a Google Apps enabled address and he'll add you.


---


# ğŸ“‹ Attendance

 WIP, the list of all the people invited to the meeting. **In bold, the people that have been seen in the meeting:**



* Apple
    * Dan Glastonbury
    * **Mike Wyrzykowski **
    * **Myles C. Maxfield**
* Cocos
    * Huabin Ling
    * Zeqiang Li
    * Zhenglong Zhou
* Connecting Matrix
    * Muhammad Abeer
* Google
    * **Alan Baker**
    * Antonio Maiorano
    * **Ben Clayton**
    * Brandon Jones
    * Corentin Wallez
    * dan sinclair
    * **David Neto**
    * Ekaterina Ignasheva
    * Kai Ninomiya
    * James Price
    * Rahul Garg
    * Ryan Harrison
* Intel
    * Hao Li
    * Jia A Chen
    * Jiajia Qin
    * Jiawei Shao
    * Narifumi Iwamoto
    * **Shaobo Yan**
    * Yang Gu
    * Yunchao He
    * **Zhaoming Jiang**
* Kings Distributed Systems
    * Daniel Desjardins
    * Hamada Gasmallah
    * Wes Garland
* Microsoft
    * Damyan Pepper
    * Greg Roth
    * Michael Dougherty
    * **Rafael Cintron**
    * Tex Riddell
* Mozilla
    * Erich Gubler
    * **Jim Blandy**
    * **Kelsey Gilbert**
    * Teodor Tanasoaia
* UC Santa Cruz
    * Reese Levine
    * Tyler Sorensen
* Unity
    * Brendan Duncan
* Dominic Cerisano
* Dzmitry Malyshau
* Eduardo H.P. Souza
* Jeremy Sachs
* Joshua Groves
* Lukasz Pasek
* Matijs Toonen
* Mehmet Oguz Derin
* Michael Shannon
* Pelle Johnsen
* Robin Morisset
* Timo de Kort
* Tyler Larson
* Jason Erb


---


# ğŸ“¢ Announcements


### Office Hour



* **Wednesday 10am-10:50am**
* **[https://meet.google.com/xrp-hpck-vmy](https://meet.google.com/xrp-hpck-vmy)**
* Everyone welcome
* Mass calendar invite will have been sent out
    * If you still need an invite, add your email here:
        * [kelsey.gilbert@mozilla.com](mailto:kelsey.gilbert@mozilla.com) (example)
        * 


### FYIs and Notable Offline Merges



* [https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4145](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4145) Reorganized sections


---


# â³ Timeboxes (until XX:15)


### Process: staging milestone 2 features



* Example: Weâ€™ve agreed to do [dp4](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/pull/2738), when should it be released?
* If features are frozen for some time, editors will come up with a process for staging features
* AB: Key question is are holding off landing things?
* KG: **Third option is to not talk about things for a while, and not have a staging branch**. Donâ€™t want to specify things too far out in front of ourselves. Donâ€™t have implementation and get feedback.  Itâ€™s takes time away from current engineering effort. Think we should triage into buckets.  Think we should hold off new development.
* AB: Want to avoid having PRs languish and bit rot over time. Example is dp4 that has a PR.
* KG: More important to do due diligence than to land things.  Donâ€™t think weâ€™ll have enough reason to spin up a staging branch.
* JB: Agree with Kelsey. Letâ€™s focus on implementation and reduce activity.
* JB: In the specific case of dp4, is that something we agreed to merge already?  If we already agreed and did a PR.
* AB: We agreed to land it â€œpost-v1â€. 
* KG: In this case someone has done the work out in front of the committee. I donâ€™t want to optimize for this scenario.  Think we should leave it as-is. Folks want to do fixups at the same time; and that unfortunately works against PRs that are already in flight.


### [WGSL: Add dot4U8Packed and dot4I8Packed as new built-in functions](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/pull/2738)



* Updated to include pack and unpack functions
* KG: **This falls into future work. Defer for now**.


### [Clarify behavior of (norm) packing built-in functions Â· Issue #4159](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4159)



* DN: As with all rounding for FP, it can round up or down. **Will look at making that optionality clearer in the spec. And CTS is written to allow either behaviour**.


### [Add built-in struct types for indirect calls Â· Issue #4158](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4158)



* KG: An option for convenience. Letâ€™s give it to them.
* AB: When?
* JB: This seems easy and quick. Iâ€™m for landing it.
* AB: Think this is cruft.  Donâ€™t think every API you add should get a named struct. Might want to have it in a buffer, and then itâ€™s awkward.
* JB: Improves readability too.
* BC: 1. This would be the first time we have a built-in structure type that you can spell. 2. Last structure there has workgroup count as 3 scalars. Seems should be vector.
* _Discussion: think it should be scalars._
* KG: Donâ€™t like the member names for workgroup one.  (3rd one).
* KG: Do want to use the other ones.
* MM: Hoist name of â€œWorkgroupCountâ€ to the structure name.
* KG: **Think we can agree on the first two**. **Bikeshed naming of the last one in separate issue/pr.**.


### [Recursion in WGSL, like in CUDA and GLSL (Vulkan extension)? #4167](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4167)



* KG: Corentin notes this is not supported in some required targeted languages HLSL and SPIR-V.
* MM: MSL allows it with a hardware opt in.
* AB: There is no Vulkan extension for this.
* MM: Ok, so **canâ€™t do it. [for now]**


### [Support for device pointers #4168](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4168)



* KG: The request is actually something like Cuda malloc.  Ability to â€œallocateâ€ memory and access via pointer in shader. I can imagine ways to do this.
* AB: Sounds like â€œBuffer device addressâ€ in Vulkan.  You do a buffer allocation and can get a 64bit address for it, and pass that into the shader.  Itâ€™s somewhat supported and is popular among programmers.
* MM: Thought CUDA malloc was different. The malloc is an allocation and return a pointer.
* AB: Vulkan breaks it into two parts. Do the alloc, and then get the device address for this.  
* AB: Not exist in all 3 APIs yet.
* MM: **Person doesnâ€™t list their use case yet, but maybe we could address the underlying use case if we had more info**.


---


# âš–ï¸ Discussions


### [Add dereference operator Â· Issue #4114](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4114)



* AB: Still like Davidâ€™s old proposal.
* DN: That has perfect duality between references and pointers w.r.t.    .member and [index].
* AB: Think would be more useful conversation for when we have more functionality associated with pointers.
* KG: Think there is utility now.
* AB: Saving 2 chars is not enough of a win.
* MM: Could have two options.    ptr->member yields a reference, and  also take Davidâ€™s thing  where ptr.member yields pointer.
* KG: Think I donâ€™t like on ptr.member yielding pointers; sounds cool on the surface. But other languages donâ€™t do this.  This is â€œnovelâ€; donâ€™t want to spend novelty points.
* JB: Think it would be very surprising if . yields a pointer.  Other languages donâ€™t do that.
* MM: In C,  could overload + on pointer, so   ptr +  fieldname yields the pointer to the field
* JB: What about +.    => you could do ptr +. fieldname and that would be a pointer to the field
* DN: Please donâ€™t bring back historical mistakes into WGSL
* KG: Personally, think we should follow other languages.  .member should yield a reference.
* MM: Intentionally not like C
* KG: Itâ€™s like Go and Rust.
* MM: Why not spell it as ->
* KG: Newer languages  -> is longer and more clunky.  Just use dot. Itâ€™s the thing you most often want.
* KG: If you have pointer-to-pointer of thing (in future),  -> only dereferences once.   
* _Discussion about what to write to dereference via a stored pointer._
* BC: Recall reading in early days of Go, they didnâ€™t want to add another token to the language. Thereâ€™s nothing you can do to pointers aside from dereferencing them.  The spec does say itâ€™s syntactic sugar for (*p).member, just one level.  I stated on the issue re: not using ->, my feeling is why -> when you have exactly the same behaviour as with a pointer.  With var â€œAâ€,  A.b.c are all references; if you have a pointer at the start, it yields also a reference    p.b.c yields a reference.
* MM: We should match some existing language. Letâ€™s not mix different pieces from different languages.
* JB: **Would like to see text to look at**.  As experienced programmers we would have some visceral reactions that may guide the conversation. David added an example already.  Kelsey had something with deeply nested structs.


### [Shader extensions are redundant Â· Issue #3961](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/3961)



* KG: Iâ€™m Â¾ of my way writing my comment.  Propose we **defer this to next week**.


---


# ğŸ“† Next Meeting Agenda Requests



* Next meeting: (**Atlantic-timed**) Tuesday June 13, 2023, **11am-noon **Americas/Los_Angeles
* 

 
