# WGSL 2024-01-09 Minutes

**ğŸª‘ Chair:** KG

**âŒ¨ï¸ğŸ™ Scribes:** JB, DN

**ğŸ—º Location:** [meet.google.com](http://meet.google.com)

**âŒš Time:** Tuesday **11a-noon **Americas/Los_Angeles (**Atlantic-timed**)

**Specification:** [https://webgpu.dev/wgsl](https://webgpu.dev/wgsl)

**Meeting Issues:** [Marked Issues](https://github.com/orgs/gpuweb/projects/2#column-8898490)

**Open Issues:** [Untriaged](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues?q=is%3Aopen+label%3Awgsl+-label%3A%22wgsl+resolved%22+-label%3Aeditorial+no%3Amilestone), [M0](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues?q=label%3Awgsl+-label%3A%22wgsl+resolved%22+-label%3Aeditorial+is%3Aopen+milestone%3A%22Milestone+0%22), [M1](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues?q=label%3Awgsl+-label%3A%22wgsl+resolved%22+-label%3Aeditorial+is%3Aopen+milestone%3A%22Milestone+1%22)

**Todos doc: **[WGSL TODOs](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1OnsotW_eWoWn4m9lW2-nRrOfR8gBSJ5Oqz9O-9hTDdA/edit#gid=0)

**Previous:** [2023-12-05 WGSL - Agenda / Minutes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Q_eCQflIiXMl5MYlHQNmg9r-1PIxI-zUWGNWsycYtYw) 

 

Note: These are the minutes taken in real-time. The official minutes can be found on [the WebGPU wiki](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/wiki).

If you didn't receive a [meet.google.com](meet.google.com) invitation and plan on participating, please send dneto a Google Apps enabled address and he'll add you.


---


# ğŸ“‹ Attendance

 WIP, the list of all the people invited to the meeting. **In bold, the people that have been seen in the meeting:**



* Apple
    * Dan Glastonbury
    * **Mike Wyrzykowski **
    * Myles C. Maxfield
* Cocos
    * Huabin Ling
    * Zeqiang Li
    * Zhenglong Zhou
* Connecting Matrix
    * Muhammad Abeer
* Google
    * **Alan Baker**
    * **Antonio Maiorano**
    * **Ben Clayton**
    * Brandon Jones
    * Corentin Wallez
    * **dan sinclair**
    * **David Neto**
    * Ekaterina Ignasheva
    * Kai Ninomiya
    * **James Price**
    * Rahul Garg
    * **Ryan Harrison**
* Intel
    * Hao Li
    * Jia A Chen
    * Jiajia Qin
    * Jiawei Shao
    * Narifumi Iwamoto
    * Shaobo Yan
    * Yang Gu
    * Yunchao He
    * Zhaoming Jiang
* Kings Distributed Systems
    * Daniel Desjardins
    * Hamada Gasmallah
    * Wes Garland
* Microsoft
    * Damyan Pepper
    * Greg Roth
    * Michael Dougherty
    * **Rafael Cintron**
    * Tex Riddell
* Mozilla
    * Erich Gubler
    * **Jim Blandy**
    * **Kelsey Gilbert**
    * Teodor Tanasoaia
* UC Santa Cruz
    * Reese Levine
    * Tyler Sorensen
* Unity
    * Brendan Duncan
* **Dominic Cerisano**
* Dzmitry Malyshau
* Eduardo H.P. Souza
* Jeremy Sachs
* Joshua Groves
* Lukasz Pasek
* Matijs Toonen
* **Mehmet Oguz Derin**
* Michael Shannon
* Pelle Johnsen
* Robin Morisset
* Timo de Kort
* Tyler Larson
* Jason Erb


---


# ğŸ“¢ Announcements/Meta


### Office Hour



* **Wednesday 10am-10:50am**
* **[https://meet.google.com/xrp-hpck-vmy](https://meet.google.com/xrp-hpck-vmy)**
* Everyone welcome
* Mass calendar invite will have been sent out
    * If you still need an invite, add your email here:
        * [kelsey.gilbert@mozilla.com](mailto:kelsey.gilbert@mozilla.com) (example)
        * 


### FYIs and Notable Offline Merges



* 


---


# â³ Timeboxes (until XX:35)


## Untriaged:


### [Add diagram with memory model to WGSL spec Â· Issue #4296](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4296)



* KG: Cool illustration, but is the spec the right place for it.
* DN: From a minimal perspective, the words are what matter, but non-normative illustrations are okay. We should also only use original diagrams. Also, this is the memory hierarchy, not the memory model. But the words need to remain normative.
* JB: Use correct terminology, and be clear itâ€™s non-normative. Otherwise not strong feeling if this is in the spec or elsewhere.  **Make it editorial**.
* KG: Suggested timeframe: ~**M2 urgency**.


### [Are "Fine" derivatives guaranteed to actually be fine? Â· Issue #4325](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4325)



* KG: Step 1: clarification of existing spec.  Seems they are fine everywhere except for OpenGL ES. So it affects compat. We donâ€™t have positive confirmation that ES in practice always gives us fine.
* JB: Kai wrote â€œin practiceâ€ but itâ€™s not clear to us if that was an observation, or whether more fact-finding is needed.  If support is very limited in ES, then consider deleting the fine variants in ES, because those who ask for fine really want fine.
* AB: Makes sense. Sounds like a validation rule for compat, potentially. If â€œfineâ€ is requested in compat, then itâ€™s an error.
* KB: So, **in core spec fine always gives you fine**. Probably testable too. E.g. sign of the derivatives.
* AB: Yes.
* KB: Step 2: **compat canâ€™t actually ask for fine**.
* JB: if we find itâ€™s universally supported in ES, then we can enable it again.


### [Limitation on the precision of hex floats? Â· Issue #4350](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4350)



* **Issue closed**, with explanation on the issue.


### [document ambiguity in tie-breaks for cube map sampling face selection Â· Issue #4396](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4396)



* JB: The polyfill that spirv-cross inserts is a substantial piece of code. You have to recompute a bunch of things. Since the workaround looks expensive and folks using cubemaps are probably not caring that much, itâ€™s probably better to say â€œshouldâ€ and recommend the one behaviour but tolerate the other.
* DN: Sounds fine.  **Document the ambiguity**.


### [add swizzles for scalar->vectors conversion too Â· Issue #4428](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4428)



* KG: Jim suggested discussing at same time as the 0-1 swizzling.  Letâ€™s do it later, like those.
* DN: 01 swizzling is M3+. Move it there.
* DS: Also affects parsing, e.g. (blah).xxx now needs to track if the thing in the parens is a scalar.
* **_Move to M3+_**


### [Weird behavior while using switch code block Â· Issue #4430](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4430)



* KG:Not a spec issue.
* BC: I already made a Tint bug for this. Close.
* **_Close_**


### [Add subgroup barrier to subgroups proposal Â· Issue #4437 Â· gpuweb/gpuweb Â· GitHub](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4437)



* KG: Maybe an **M3+** thing. Add later.
* JB: Raphâ€™s example, says workgroup barrier make it not worth it.  
* AB: Would have to be its own feature flag distinct from the main subgroups feature. Raphâ€™s example also uses assumptions about mapping subgroup IDs with local Id subgroups, that are not enforced by Vulkan.


## M0:


### [Shader extensions are redundant Â· Issue #3961](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/3961) 



* (letâ€™s just check in on this)
* KG: Still think not necessary. 
* JB: Find the redundancy valuable.
* DS: Google did not have consensus on the enable_corresponding_wgsl_features.
* KG: Call to action: **think about it again**.


## M1:


### [Uniformity annotations for global variables Â· Issue #1791](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/1791)



* AB: Weâ€™re confused.  I donâ€™t understand why it was reopened.  Donâ€™t think itâ€™s necessary.
* JB: In terms of making an assertion about the variable, â€œtreat this as uniformâ€; we didnâ€™t think that was value.  Itâ€™s nice for the user to state their assumption and make a request to check; then they can treat as an error or warning. It wouldnâ€™t change the conclusions of the analysis.
* BC: Thatâ€™s nice, but would be hesitant to add more controls to the uniformity analysis until someone requests it in a real example. So far what Iâ€™ve seen is confusion on the part of users. 
* JB: This is not more control. Itâ€™s helpful for people who are confused.  You can annotate intermediates and have it checked.  Strictly gives more information about what the uniformity analysis thinks.
* AB: Itâ€™s not exactly. Itâ€™s an assumption currently that writable global variables are non-uniform.  So now youâ€™re adding more endpoints to the check to verify. Itâ€™s not free because itâ€™s not something thatâ€™s implemented.
* BC: Most of the folks Iâ€™ve been helping arenâ€™t even sure what uniformity means. Thereâ€™s a certain level of learning to be done before we give more tools.
* JB: Platforms do care what uniformity is. 
* DN: Sounds like what you want is uniform(X) that you can then static-assert on.
* JP: Thatâ€™s a different use case than what is being requested here.  E.g. tf.js ran into this; we had to change Tintâ€™s output to accommodate.
* DN: Still donâ€™t think weâ€™re in consensus that this is good to add.
* AB: Happy to push to M3+, Weâ€™ve had solutions for folks so far. Donâ€™t think thereâ€™s a pressing need.
* JP: Clients that run across this in their own code can pass values down as parameters.
* **_Move to M3+_**


### [Add PI and TAU builtins Â· Issue #4100](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4100)



* 


### [Feature request: textureQueryLod equivalent Â· Issue #4180](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4180)



* 


---


# âš–ï¸ Discussions


### [`AbstractInt` conversion ranking forces unfortunate compromise Â· Issue #4291](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4291)



* Also: [Conversion from AbstractInteger to i32 appears to be underspecified #4415](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/4415)
* (needs milestone)
* DN:  
* JB: I think this should be M1, since itâ€™s a bugfix of a feature that we already added. 
* MW: Also noticed an issue converting abstractFloat to int32.
    * [https://github.com/gpuweb/cts/issues/3253](https://github.com/gpuweb/cts/issues/3253)  (shader,execution,expression,binary,af_addition:scalar:* has incorrect expectations #3253)
* AB: Think Ryan was looking into this today.
* BC: Part of a bag of features.
* BC: Think this is a bugfix that would land ASAP.
* JB: Agree this is a bugfix.
* **_#4415 Resolved, needs a PR.  _**
* AB: Is #4291 also closeable?
* JB: **Yes**


---


# ğŸ“† Next Meeting Agenda Requests



* Next meeting: (**Pacific-timed**) Tuesday January 16, 2023, **4-5pm** (America/Los_Angeles)
* _(next pacific-timed, from JS)_ [HW Clip Planes support Â· Issue #390](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb/issues/390) 
* 